---
uid: 20220726111151
title: "記事の追加テスト"
alias: ["volatile"]
date: 2022-07-26
update: 2022-07-27
tags: ["rust", "computer_science"]
draft: false
---

# Volatile Read/Write

## Definition

- Volatile read/write mean that the read/write operations are not optimized away by a compiler. 
- > The compiler shouldn't change the relative order or number of volatile memory operations. [^1]

- [C11's definition of volatile](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n1570.pdf): 

## Usage
Mainly used to memory-mapped I/O, especially: 
1. to registers (or memory) whose values change by read/write
    - ex. reading the register clears the register, which means the relative order or number of volatile operations are important.
2. to read the register repeatedly to detect status update
    - the reads are likely to be omitted. 
3. when write and then read memory and know whether it is memory or not. If the value are the same, it is assumed as memory.

Example:
```rust
// example of the 2nd situation:
loop {
    let flag = (0x000 as *mut u8).read();
    if flag > 0 { /* do something */ }
}
```

## In Rust

### Rust interface: `read_volatile` / `write_volatile`
- [`core::ptr::read_volatile`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/ptr/fn.read_volatile.html)
    - [`read_volatile`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/primitive.pointer.html#method.read_volatile) (raw pointer method)
- [`core::ptr::write_volatile`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/ptr/fn.write_volatile.html)
    - [`write_volatile`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/primitive.pointer.html#method.write_volatile) (raw pointer method)

### Memos about (volatile) reads/writes in Rust
What I know so far about Rust and volatile:
- Rust volatile semantics is almost always end up pretty similar to [C11's definition of volatile](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n1570.pdf) 
- A Rust reference is equivalent to a non-NULL **pointer-to-non-volatile** object. [^2]
- A Rust pointer is equivalent to **a C plain pointer**, which is not **volatile**. [^2]
- If you need volatile reads/writes, use `read_volatile` / `write_volatile`. [^2]
- Volatile reads/writes are mainly for memory-mapped I/O. [^2]
- The only use for volatile is to access memory-mapped I/O, which is always unsafe since you're writing to an arbitrary memory location outside of Rust's control

---

[^1]: [Volatile and sensitive memory](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/volatile-and-sensitive-memory/3188)  
[^2]: [read_volatile](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ptr/fn.read_volatile.html)

---

## memo

### Q

> since there is no `volatile` modifier, does that mean that the Rust compiler must assume that all memory is volatile by default?
> In particular, in general given `x: &u64`, the compiler won't know if x is a reference to value stored in volatile memory, right?
> 

> In particular, "volatile read" and "volatile write" seem to only make sense under the assumption that there are no speculative reads/writes to the memory they are writing to, but there's no way to indicate to rustc that no speculative reads/writes are allowed. 

- todo: speculative reads/writes?: 
- 

### A
> You cannot `volatile_store` or `volatile_load` an object that is pointed to by a reference; that would be a violation of the aliasing rules, just like having an exclusive reference and a shared reference to the same object is.

### Q

> I'm not sure what you mean. Here's some code. Is the compiler allowed rewrite `easy` into `easy_optimized`? Is it allowed to rewrite `tricky` into `trycky_extra_load`?

```rust
#![feature(core_intrinsics)]

fn easy(x: &u64, y: &u64) -> u64 {
    if *x != 0 {
        *x
    } else {
        *y
    }
}

fn easy_optimized(x: &u64, y: &u64) -> u64 {
    // The compiler replaces two loads of |*x| 
    let ret = *x;
    if ret != 0 {
        ret
    } else {
        *y
    }
}

fn tricky(x: &u64, y: &u64) -> u64 {
    if unsafe { std::intrinsics::volatile_load(x as *const u64) } != 0 {
        unsafe { std::intrinsics::volatile_load(x as *const u64) }
    } else {
        *y
    }
}

fn tricky_extra_load(x: &u64, y: &u64) -> u64 {
    // The compiler adds a spurious read of |*x| when compiling `tricky`.
    let _ = *x;
    if unsafe { std::intrinsics::volatile_load(x as *const u64) } != 0 {
        unsafe { std::intrinsics::volatile_load(x as *const u64) }
    } else {
        *y
    }
}

fn main() {
  let x = 1;
  let y = 2;
  easy(&x, &y);
  easy_optimized(&x, &y);
  tricky(&x, &y);
  tricky_extra_load(&x, &y);
}
```

### A
> Yes it is, because you are using a `&u64`, which guarantees that it points to valid instance of u64. Now, this isn't actually specified in the documentation, but Rust (at least the way it is currently implemented ) will also assume that it points to normal memory where reading the value multiple times will not result in any-side-effects and will always return the same value.

### A

> > So, would it be fair to say that a Rust reference is equivalent to a non-NULL pointer-to-non-volatile object?
> Yes

> > So, would it be fair to say that a Rust pointer is equivalent to a C pointer to volatile object?
> Not quite. **Regular reads and writes are not volatile**, so you'll need to use the volatile functions if that's what you want.

### A
> > So, would it be fair to say that a Rust reference is equivalent to a non-NULL pointer-to-non-volatile object?
> Yes

> > So, would it be fair to say that a Rust pointer is equivalent to a C pointer to volatile object?
> No, a Rust pointer is equivalent to **a plain C pointer**. A C compiler is not allowed to insert a spurious load if a pointer is never dereferenced (volatile dereferences don't count). This is because, in C, dereferencing a (non-volatile) pointer requires the pointer to point to a valid object in normal memory, otherwise undefined behavior happens. Since the compiler assumes undefined behavior never happens it can assure that the pointer is safely deference-able. Rust pointers work the same way.

- spurious: false and not what it appears to be, or (of reasons and judgements) based on something that has not been correctly understood and therefore false: 
    - ex. Some of the arguments in favor of shutting the factory are questionable and others downright spurious


> The only use for volatile is to access memory-mapped I/O, which is always unsafe since you're writing to an arbitrary memory location outside of Rust's control. You can create a safe wrapper around a raw pointer to allow safe access to a specific I/O memory location, but the actual access will still need to use unsafe code.


### Q





